19
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
22
23
In mammalian reproduction, luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) production from pituitary gonadotrope cells is critical for the regulation of gonadal functions such as steroidogenesis and gametogenesis , . LH and FSH are heterodimeric glycoproteins composed of a common alpha subunit and a beta subunit which is unique to each hormone . Transcription of  and  is one of the rate limiting steps in the production of the mature hormones ,  and is tightly controlled by a complex network of hormonal signaling pathways including those activated by gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) and activin .

Signals from pulsatile GnRH, released from the hypothalamus, are transmitted through activation of the G-protein coupled GnRH receptor on the surface of gonadotrope cells . In addition to GnRH, activin signaling via binding to activin type II serine/threonine kinase receptors, which results in the phosphorylation of activin type I receptors , is also important for gonadotropin production. Activation of these receptors results in the phosphorylation of downstream Sma- and mothers against decapentaplegic (MAD)-related proteins, SMAD2 and SMAD3 . SMAD2/3 then bind to SMAD4, translocate into the nucleus and activate transcription of specific target genes , , . Activin responsiveness of the rodent  promoter has been extensively characterized (reviewed in , ). SMAD2/3/4 have been shown to bind three SMAD binding elements (SBE) at 267, 149 and 116 of the murine  promoter , . Forkhead box L2 (FOXL2) has also been reported to bind three elements at 350, 154 and 113 in the murine  promoter and mutation of these sites disrupt activin induction .

There is considerable evidence that gonadotropin production may be modulated by metabolic hormones such as insulin, in addition to reproductive hormones . One group of candidate genes that may be regulated by insulin in gonadotropes is the FOXO subfamily of forkhead box transcription factors. FOXOs have been shown to be key regulators of cellular pathways involved in apoptosis, stress resistance, cell cycle arrest, and DNA damage repair , . They also have important roles in metabolism, homeostasis and reproduction.  knockout mice have an age-dependent reduction in fertility caused by defective ovarian follicular growth, similar to premature ovarian failure in women . Conditional knockouts of  have demonstrated that FOXO1 plays a role in ovarian granulosa cell proliferation and apoptosis, along with FOXO3 and that FOXO1 is essential for maintenance and differentiation of spermatogonial stem cells in the testis , . The activity of FOXOs is regulated by post-translational modifications including phosphorylation, acetylation and ubiquitination . Activation of the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway, in response to insulin/growth factor stimulation, results in FOXO phosphorylation, nuclear export and inhibition of their transcriptional activities .

Previously, we reported that the FOXO1 transcription factor is expressed in gonadotrope cells and that its phosphorylation and cellular localization are regulated by insulin signaling in a PI3K-dependent manner . We also demonstrated that FOXO1 overexpression inhibits basal and GnRH induction of  and  synthesis in immortalized gonadotrope cells , . Since FOXO1 was reported to interact with SMAD3/4 in immortalized keratinocytes , we hypothesized that FOXO1 may also modulate activin signaling in gonadotrope cells. In this study, we used the immortalized gonadotrope-derived LT2 cell model to determine whether FOXO1 alters activin induction of  gene expression and to investigate the mechanisms involved.

The pcDNA3 human FOXO1 and FOXO1-CA expression plasmids were previously described . The pALTER human FOXO1, FOXO1-CA, and FOXO1-CA-DNA binding domain (DBD) mutant (W209G/H215L) expression vectors were generously provided by Dr. Terry Unterman . The pRK5 SMAD2, SMAD3 and SMAD4 expression vectors were kindly provided by Dr. Rik Derynck. The 1000 murine -luciferase (luc) in pGL3 and 5 truncations (500, 304, 95) were previously described , , . The 4XSBE-luc containing four repeats of a consensus SBE () was obtained from Dr. Djurdjica Coss. The 4FBE-luc was constructed by inserting four repeats of a consensus Forkhead binding element (FBE) () upstream of a minimal thymidine kinase promoter in pGL3 using KpnI and NheI restriction enzyme sites as was the 4XFL2BE-luc containing four repeats of a consensus FOXL2 binding element (FLRE) () .

Cell culture was performed with the immortalized murine LT2 cell line which has many characteristics of a mature, differentiated gonadotrope , . Cells were maintained in 10 cm plates in Dulbecco's Modification of Eagles Medium (DMEM) from Mediatech Inc., (Herndon, VA) with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) (Omega Scientific, Inc., Tarzana, CA) and penicillin/streptomycin antibiotics (Gibco/Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY) at 37C and 5% CO. 1 Trypsin-EDTA (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) was used for cell dissociation.

LT2 cells were seeded at 4.510 cells/well on 12-well plates and transfected 18 hours later, using PolyJet DNA  Transfection Reagent (SignaGen, Rockville, MD), following the manufacturer's instructions. For all experiments, the cells were transfected for 6 hours with 400 ng of the indicated luc reporter plasmid and 200 ng of a -galactosidase (-gal) reporter plasmid driven by the Herpes Virus thymidine kinase promoter to control for transfection efficiency. The cells were switched to serum-free DMEM containing 0.1% BSA, 5 mg/L transferrin and 50 mM sodium selenite 6 hours after transfection. After overnight incubation in serum-free media, the cells were treated with vehicle (0.1% BSA) or 10 ng/mL activin (Calbiochem, La Jolla, CA) for 6 hours.

To harvest the cells, they were washed with 1 phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and lysed with 0.1 M K-phosphate buffer pH 7.8 containing 0.2% Triton X-100. Lysed cells were assayed for luc activity using a buffer containing 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.8, 15 mM MgSO, 10 mM ATP, and 65 M luciferin. -Gal activity was assayed using the Tropix Galacto-light assay (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA), according to the manufacturer's protocol. Both assays were measured using a Veritas Microplate Luminometer (Promega, Madison, WI).

Transient transfections were performed in triplicate and each experiment was repeated at least three times as indicated in the figure legend. The data were normalized for transfection efficiency by expressing luc activity relative to -gal and then made relative to the empty pGL3 plasmid to control for FOXO1 effects on the empty vector. The data were analyzed by Student's -test for independent samples, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by post-hoc comparisons with the Tukey-Kramer Honestly Significant Difference test or two-way ANOVA to determine synergy as described in  using the statistical package JMP 11.0 (SAS, Cary, NC). Significant differences were designated as <0.05.

Adenoviral vectors containing cDNA of green fluorescent protein (Ad-GFP) and constitutively active FOXO1 (T24A/S256D/S319A) (Ad-FOXO1-CA) were provided by Dr. Domenico Accili . LT2 cells were seeded at 210 cells/well on 6-well plates. The next morning, cells were transduced with a multiplicity of infection of 200 of Ad-GFP or Ad-FOXO1-CA for 6 hours, then switched to serum-free media. 24 hours after adenoviral infection, cells were treated with vehicle (0.1% BSA), 10 ng/mL activin, 10 nM GnRH (Sigma-Aldrich), or both hormones for 6 hours.

Total RNA was extracted from LT2 cells with TRIzol Reagent (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) following the manufacturer's protocol. Contaminating DNA was removed with DNA- reagent (Life Technologies). 2 g of RNA was reverse-transcribed using the iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc., Hercules, CA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Quantitative real-time PCR was performed in an iQ5 iCycler using iQ SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc.) and the following primers:  forward, ;  reverse, ; Gapdh forward, ; Gapdh reverse, , under the following conditions: 95C for 5 min, followed by 40 cycles at 95C for 45 sec, 54C for 45 sec, and 72C for 45 sec. Each sample was assayed in triplicate and the experiment was repeated three times. Standard curves with dilutions of a plasmid containing  or  cDNA were generated with the samples in each run. In each experiment, the amount of  was calculated by comparing the threshold cycle obtained for each sample with the standard curve generated in the same run. Replicates were averaged and divided by the mean value of  in the same sample. After each run, a melting curve analysis was performed to confirm that a single amplicon was generated in each reaction.

Cells were harvested by incubating in a lysis buffer [10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Nonidet P-40 (NP40), 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, complete protease inhibitor cocktail pellet (Roche Molecular Biochemical, Indianapolis, IN) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail pellet (Roche)] for 10 min at 4C. The protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay. An equal amount of protein per sample was loaded on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel. Proteins were resolved by electrophoresis and transferred for 2 h at 100 V onto polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (Millipore, Billerica, MA). Membranes were blocked overnight in 5% nonfat milk, then incubated overnight at 4C with rabbit anti-human FOXO1 (1:1000; sc-11350) or rabbit anti-human GAPDH (1:3000; sc-25778). Blots were then incubated with an anti-rabbit horseradish peroxidase-linked secondary antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and bands were visualized using the SuperSignal West Dura Substrate (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL).

Flag-FOXO1-CA was transcribed and translated using a TnT Coupled Reticulolysate System (Promega). The oligonucleotides were end-labeled with T4 polynucleotide kinase and [-P] ATP. 4 L of TnT lysate was incubated with 1 fmol of P-labeled oligo at 4C for 30 min in a DNA-binding buffer [10 mM Hepes pH 7.8, 50 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl, 0.1% NP-40, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 2 g poly(dI-dC), and 10% glycerol]. After 30 min, the DNA binding reactions were run on a 5% polyacrylamide gel (30:1 acrylamide: bisacrylamide) containing 2.5% glycerol in a 0.25 TBE buffer. Murine Flag M2 (Sigma-Aldrich F1804) antibody was used for supershift; murine IgG was used as a control for non-specific binding. The following oligonucleotides were used for EMSA: 305/271 , 275/241 , 245/211 , 215/181 , 185/151 , 155/121 , 125/91 , and the consensus FBE  .

GST-SMAD2/3/4 were provided by Dr. Rik Derynck and the GFP expression vector by Dr. Douglass Forbes. S-labeled proteins were produced using the TnT Coupled Reticulolysate System. Bacteria transformed with GST plasmids were grown to OD of 0.6 and induced with IPTG overnight at 30C . Bacterial pellets were sonicated in 0.1% Triton X-100, 5 mM EDTA in 1 PBS, centrifuged and the supernatant was bound to glutathione sepharose 4B resin (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Piscataway, NJ). Beads were washed 4 in PBS and in HND buffer (10 mg/ml BSA, 20 mM Hepes pH 7.8, 50 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT, and 0.1% NP-40). For the interaction assay, 20 l of S-labeled  transcribed and translated GFP, FOXO1, FOXO1-CA, or FOXO1-CA-DBD mutant was added to the beads with 400 l of HND buffer. Beads were incubated overnight at 4C, washed 2 with HND buffer and 2 with 0.1% NP-40 in PBS. Thirty l of 2 Laemmli load buffer was added, the samples were boiled and electrophoresed on a 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel. One fourth of the S-labeled  transcribed-translated product was loaded onto the gel as input.

LT2 cells were incubated overnight in serum-free media and then treated with or without 10 ng/mL activin for 2 hours. The cells were harvested and nuclear extracts were prepared, as previously described . Protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay. 400 g of pre-cleared nuclear extracts were incubated with 4 g of mouse IgG (Santa Cruz sc-2025), SMAD4 antibody (sc-7966) or SMAD2/3 antibody (BD Biosciences 610842) at 4C for 1 hour. Twenty-five L of Protein A Magnetic Beads (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) were added and the extracts were rocked overnight at 4C. Bead/protein complexes were washed 1 with PBS then eluted in 2 SDS sample buffer at 70C for 5 minutes. 20 g of protein was electrophoresed on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel, transferred to a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane and blocked overnight in 5% non-fat dry milk in 1 Tris-buffered saline with 0.1% Tween-20. The blots were then incubated overnight at 4C with rabbit anti-SMAD4 (Millipore 04-1033; 1:1000 dilution), SMAD2/3 (sc-8332; 1:1000) or FOXO1 (sc-11350, 1:1000 dilution) primary antibodies. Blots were incubated with a goat anti-rabbit horseradish peroxidase-linked secondary antibody (Santa Cruz; 1:5000) and bands were visualized using the SuperSignal West Dura Substrate (Thermo Scientific).

We recently published that overexpression of the FOXO1 transcription factor in immortalized LT2 gonadotrope cells resulted in decreased basal and GnRH-induced  and  gene expression , . To determine whether FOXO1 can modulate activin signaling in gonadotropes, we transfected LT2 cells with a multimer containing four repeats of a consensus FBE fused with a luc reporter gene (4FBE-luc) along with constitutively active FOXO1 (FOXO1-CA), which remains in the nucleus due to the inability of insulin/growth factor signaling to phosphorylate the mutated residues. Overexpression of FOXO1-CA increased expression of the 4FBE-luc but activin treatment did not result in significantly increased transcription of the 4FBE-luc in the absence or presence of FOXO1-CA (). In contrast to the 4FBE-luc, overexpression of FOXO1 reduced expression of 1000 bp of the murine  promoter fused to a luc reporter gene (m-luc). As previously reported , both wild-type FOXO1 and FOXO1-CA reduced basal expression of m-luc (). Additionally, although the fold activin induction of the murine  promoter was not significantly decreased by wild-type FOXO1, FOXO1-CA significantly reduced activin induction of  by 50% (). The lack of a significant decrease in activin induction of  due to overexpression of wild-type FOXO1 was not altogether unexpected since we previously showed that transfection of LT2 cells with pcDNA3 FOXO1 resulted in FOXO1 being predominantly localized in the cytoplasm with some nuclear localization whereas pcDNA FOXO1-CA was localized in the nucleus .

To determine whether FOXO1-CA suppression of activin-induced transcription also occurs on the endogenous  promoter in gonadotropes, we transfected LT2 cells with a control GFP adenovirus (Ad-GFP) or an adenovirus containing FOXO1-CA (Ad-FOXO1-CA) and measured  mRNA levels relative to  in response to vehicle, activin, GnRH, or activin and GnRH co-treatment. As previously reported , overexpression of FOXO1-CA significantly decreased basal  mRNA levels by 62% (). In LT2 cells transduced with Ad-GFP,  mRNA levels were induced 17 fold by activin and 4 fold by GnRH while cotreatment with activin and GnRH resulted in a synergistic 60 fold induction, similar to what was previously reported , . In contrast, activin induction was decreased by 62%, GnRH by 65% and activin and GnRH synergy by 82% in cells transduced with Ad-FOXO1-CA (). These results indicate that constitutively active FOXO1 suppression of activin-, GnRH- or activin and GnRH-induced  gene expression occurs in the context of the native chromatin.

As described in the introduction, the murine  promoter contains multiple activin response elements including SMAD and FOXL2 binding sites (). We used 5 truncation analysis to determine which regions of the promoter were necessary for FOXO1 suppression. Both activin induction and FOXO1 suppression were lost with the 95 -luc (). These results indicate that the region between 304 and 95 is necessary for activin responsiveness as well as suppression by FOXO1 and suggest that the mechanism of suppression may involve SMAD and FOXL2 transcription factors.

To further investigate how activin-induced  transcription is inhibited by FOXO1, we tested whether the FOXO1 DBD was necessary for the repression, as previously demonstrated for FOXO1 suppression of basal and GnRH-induced  and  gene expression , . As a control for the level of protein expression, we demonstrated that comparable levels of FOXO1-CA and a FOXO1-CA-DBD mutant were expressed when transfected into LT2 cells (). While FOXO1-CA overexpression in LT2 cells suppressed activin-induced -luc, overexpression of FOXO1-CA with a DBD mutation (FOXO1-CA-DBD, ) was not able to repress activin induction of  (). These results indicate that the FOXO1 DBD is necessary to elicit an inhibitory effect on activin signaling to the  promoter.

Since the FOXO1 repression mapped to the 304/95 region of the  promoter and required the FOXO1 DBD, we performed EMSA to determine whether FOXO1 could bind to this part of the promoter . Seven 35-mer oligonucleotide probes were designed to span the 304/95 region. Flag-FOXO1-CA, synthesized with TnT rabbit reticulocyte lysate, bound to an oligonucleotide probe containing a consensus FBE (, lane 1). To identify which complex contained the Flag-FOXO1-CA bound to the FBE, we supershifted the complex with a Flag antibody (, lane 3) but not with control IgG (, lane 2). Incubation with an oligo encompassing the 125/91 region of the  promoter also resulted in the formation of a barely detectable protein-DNA complex that was clearly shifted with a Flag antibody but not IgG (, lanes 2224) while incubation with oligos encompassing the 305/121 regions did not result in detectable FOXO1 binding (, lanes 421). These results suggest that, in contrast to the consensus FBE, FOXO1 can bind weakly to the 125/91 region of the murine  promoter.

Since FOXO1 binding to the 125/95 region of the  promoter was weak compared to FOXO1 binding to the consensus FBE, we investigated whether FOXO1 physically interacts with SMAD proteins. We tested whether FOXO1 or DNA-binding deficient FOXO1 interacts with SMADs by incubating GST-SMAD2/3/4 fusion proteins with -transcribed and translated S-labeled FOXO1, FOXO1-CA or a FOXO1-CA-DBD mutant in pull-down experiments. As shown in , there was minimal interaction between the GST-SMAD fusion proteins and the negative control (S-GFP) or with GST alone incubated with FOXO1, FOXO1-CA or the FOXO1-CA-DBD mutant. In contrast, there was a strong interaction between FOXO1 and SMAD3 or SMAD4 which was not observed between FOXO1 and SMAD2. Additionally, a strong interaction was also observed between FOXO1-CA and SMAD3 or SMAD4 while there was no detectable interaction between the FOXO1-CA-DBD mutant and SMAD3 or SMAD4, indicating that the interaction between FOXO1 and SMAD3/4 requires the FOXO1 DBD.

Given our results demonstrating a direct protein-protein interaction between FOXO1 and SMAD3/4 , we then determined whether endogenous FOXO1 could interact with these proteins in gonadotrope cells using a co-immunoprecipitation assay. As shown in , SMAD4 and SMAD2/3 were efficiently immunoprecipitated from nuclear extracts obtained from activin-treated or untreated LT2 cells. Since SMAD4 has been previously shown to interact with SMAD2/3 , SMAD2/3 co-immunoprecipitated with SMAD4 or  were used as positive controls and occurred in cells treated with activin. Interestingly, FOXO1 was also co-immunoprecipitated with SMAD4 or SMAD2/3 in an activin-dependent manner, indicating that endogenous FOXO1 can interact with SMAD3 and SMAD4 in gonadotropes.

To further examine the mechanism of FOXO1 repression of activin induction, we tested whether FOXO1 could alter SMAD-dependent transcription in gonadotrope cells. Initially, we examined the effect of FOXO1-CA overexpression on SMAD induction of  gene expression. Overexpression of SMAD3 or SMAD4 induced  transcription by 34 fold while overexpression of SMAD3 and SMAD4 resulted in a 28-fold induction (). Noticeably, FOXO1-CA overexpression resulted in a profound inhibition of SMAD3/4 induction of  synthesis (). We also demonstrated that the FOXO1 DBD was required for the suppression of SMAD3/4-induced  transcription (). Since FOXO1 suppression of activin-induced  transcription mapped to the 304/95 region of the  promoter that contains multiple SMADs and FOXL2 binding sites, we tested whether activin induction of a multimer containing four repeats of a consensus binding element for SMADs or FOXL2 (SBE or FLRE) was inhibited by FOXO1. Activin induced the 4SBE-luc by 4 fold while the 4FLRE-luc was induced by 1.5 fold (). Interestingly, overexpression of FOXO1-CA significantly reduced the fold activin induction of the SBE but had no effect on the FLRE (). Additionally, overexpression of FOXO1-CA with a DBD mutation was unable to suppress activin induction of the SBE, indicating that the FOXO1 DBD was also required for this effect. The weak activin induction of the 4FLRE and the lack of activin induction of a multimer of the 350/341 FOXL2 binding site  suggest that, unlike an SBE, a FOXL2 binding site is not sufficient for activin induction and thus, it is difficult to assess the role of FOXL2 in the FOXO1 suppression. In contrast, our data provides strong evidence that overexpression of FOXO1-CA results in decreased activin and SMAD-induction of  in immortalized gonadotrope cells.

The importance of activin signaling in the production of FSH has been illustrated using mouse knockout models. Deletion of the Type II activin receptor as well as gonadotrope-specific knockdown of both SMAD4 and FOXL2 resulted in a hypogonadal hypogonadism phenotype reminiscent of the  knockout . Since FOXO1 was previously reported to interact with SMAD3/4 proteins in HaCAT and Cos-1 cells , we investigated whether FOXO1 could regulate activin induction of  gene expression. We demonstrated that overexpression of constitutively active FOXO1 repressed activin- or activin and GnRH-induced transcription of a murine -luc reporter as well as endogenous  mRNA in LT2 cells (). The FOXO1 repression occurred in a context-dependent manner since FOXO1 overexpression induced transcription of a consensus FBE (). Along with evidence that FOXO1 can suppress basal and GnRH-induced  gene expression , , these data support the idea that nuclear localized FOXO1 may have a significant inhibitory effect on  transcription in gonadotrope cells although it should be noted that overexpression studies can result in responses that do not occur in the  physiological context.

Since activin regulation of  transcription involves both SMADs and FOXL2, we sought to characterize the mechanism that FOXO1 employs to repress activin signaling in gonadotropes. We demonstrated that the region between 304 and 95, which contains several SMAD and FOXL2 binding elements, is necessary for the FOXO1 repression (). We then showed that two mutations (W209G and H215L) in helix 3 of the FOXO1 DBD prevented FOXO1 from eliciting a repressive effect (). H215 has been shown to make DNA contacts through hydrogen-bonding and water-mediated interactions  but the role of these two residues in protein-protein interactions is unknown. Our data suggests that the FOXO1 DBD is necessary for FOXO1 repression because FOXO1 binds directly to the  promoter or because FOXO1 forms protein-protein interactions with factors critical for activin induction of  transcription via the FOXO1 DBD.

To assess these two possibilities, we tested whether FOXO1 could bind to the region of the  promoter necessary for the repressive effect. Gel-shift assays demonstrated that  transcribed and translated FOXO1 bound to the 125/91 region of the  promoter, albeit much more weakly than FOXO1 binding to a consensus FBE (). Interestingly, the 125/91 region contains a composite binding element for SMAD and FOXL2 proteins which has been shown to be essential for activin induction , , . We did not observe binding of FOXO1 to this region of the promoter when LT2 nuclear extracts were used instead of TnT FOXO1. Our studies are in agreement with a recent report by Choi  which demonstrated that FOXO1 can bind to the  promoter using a DNA pulldown assay but was not detectable in a gel-shift assay employing LT2 nuclear extracts . Thus, these studies indicate that FOXO1 binding to the  promoter may be a potential mechanism of FOXO1 repression of activin signaling in gonadotropes.

We then explored the possibility that FOXO1 repression of activin signaling in gonadotropes is due to protein-protein interactions between FOXO1 and SMAD3/4. Our GST pulldown experiments confirmed that FOXO1 can directly interact with SMAD3 and SMAD4  and that this interaction was dependent on the FOXO1 DBD (). Notably, this was in contrast to the lack of interaction observed between FOXO1 and SMAD2. Since SMAD2 and SMAD3 are very similar proteins except that SMAD2 contains an insertion in the MH1 domain that prevents DNA binding, our data suggests that the inhibitory domain prevents interaction between FOXO1 and SMAD2. This idea is supported by the fact that the SMAD2 splice variant that lacks this insertion was reported to bind FOXO proteins . It is also noteworthy that SMAD3 and SMAD4 were previously reported to bind FOXO1 through the MH1 domain . FOXO1 interaction with SMAD3 and SMAD4 in an activin-dependent manner in co-immunoprecipitation experiments suggests that SMAD phosphorylation is required to bind FOXO1 (). This data is in agreement with the report that the FOXO1 interaction with SMAD3/4 was dependent on TGF treatment of the cells . Our studies also demonstrated that FOXO1 repressed the effects of SMAD3/4 overexpression on -luc and activin induction of a 4SBE-luc in a FOXO1 DBD-dependent manner (). Altogether, these results provide strong support for the hypothesis that FOXO1-CA modulates activin responsiveness of the  promoter by interacting with SMAD3/4 via the FOXO1 DBD.

In summary, our studies provide evidence that the FOXO1 transcription factor may negatively regulate activin induction of  synthesis through FOXO1 binding to the proximal  promoter as well as through a direct interaction between the FOXO1 DBD and SMAD3/4. Since these experiments were performed in immortalized gonadotrope cells, additional studies are needed to determine whether FOXO1 functions in the pituitary to negatively regulate gonadotropin production . Moreover, since FOXO proteins act as coactivators of SMAD-dependent transcription in several other cell types , , , future studies are required to understand how FOXO1 acts as a repressor of activin signaling in pituitary gonadotrope cells. It may also be worthwhile to investigate whether FOXO1 regulates additional activin responsive genes in gonadotrope cells including the GnRH receptor and follistatin . Interactions between FOXO and SMAD proteins may also be important for regulation of gene expression in other reproductive tissues that express both of these transcription factors such as the ovary and uterus , .

